Osteoporosis is a skeletal disease characterized by decreased bone strength , altered bone architecture , and increased risk of fracture and is clinically defined as bone mineral density ( BMD ) that is 2.5 standard deviations or more below the mean BMD for young adult women ( T-score2.5 ) .  Low BMD , history of fracture , and age are three of the strongest prognostic factors for subsequent osteoporosis-related fractures.4 A high rate of bone loss occurs early in the transition from pre- to postmenopause , when as much as 3 - 5% of bone is lost each year.5 This rate of bone loss then slows to approximately 1% per year when women enter the postmenopausal phase.5 .
In general , the increased bone loss observed during and after menopause can be attributed to the natural decrease in estrogen levels .
Because estrogen has a negative regulatory effect on bone-resorbing osteoclasts , a decrease in estrogen level will increase the rate of bone resorption and thereby increase fracture risk .
This association between estrogen and elevated fracture risk was observed in a large , prospective study in postmenopausal women 65 years of age.6 Baseline serum estrogen levels in women with hip or vertebral fractures ( n=271 ) were compared with serum estrogen levels in women with no fractures ( n=247 ) .
After adjustment for weight and age , women with undetectable serum estradiol levels had an approximate 60% greater risk of hip and vertebral fracture than women with low but detectable levels.6 Therefore , it appears that women with undetectable serum estradiol concentrations ( 5 pg / mL ) are at increased risk of hip and vertebral fractures .
In addition to the contribution of low estrogen to increased fracture risk , epidemiologic studies in large populations of postmenopausal women have sought to identify additional fracture risk factors that are independent of BMD status .
In a prospective study of 672 healthy postmenopausal women , independent predictors of fracture included age 65 years , prior falls , left grip strength , maternal fracture history , low physical activity , and personal fragility fracture history .
Several additional risk factors , however , including body weight , weight loss , and smoking , did not predict fracture risk independent of BMD.7 Another study in nearly 10,000 postmenopausal women identified risk factors that contribute to hip fracture .
The authors concluded that individual risk factors each had a minimal effect on fracture risk but that the combination of multiple risk factors significantly increased fracture risk.8 Furthermore , women in this study with low BMD and multiple risk factors had the greatest risk of fracture,8 suggesting that a comprehensive risk assessment may best identify women at risk of fracture .
Bone loss and fracture risk during breast cancer therapy .
Women with breast cancer may already have an elevated risk of fracture compared with age-matched women with no history of cancer .
In addition to fracture risk factors experienced by healthy postmenopausal women , breast cancer and its therapies may increase bone turnover and bone loss .
Furthermore , direct toxic effects of some chemotherapy treatments may also contribute to the increase in fracture risk .
Evidence for higher fracture risk in breast cancer survivors comes from a prospective , longitudinal cohort study of postmenopausal women enrolled in the Women 's Health Initiative Observational Study ( WHI-OS ) .9 Fracture data were collected from postmenopausal breast cancer survivors ( n=5298 ) and women without breast cancer ( n=80,848 ) and adjusted for age , body weight , ethnicity , and region of enrollment .
In this analysis , women with breast cancer had a 31% increased risk of fracture compared with women without breast cancer.9 In another study , women with breast cancer and no bone metastases had a nearly five-fold increased risk of vertebral fracture compared with healthy age-matched women , and that risk increased to approximately 23 fold in women with recurrent soft-tissue disease ( P0.0001 for both ) .10 Taken together , the results from these clinical trials indicate that survivors of breast cancer are at increased risk of fracture .
Chemotherapy treatments for breast cancer are of particular concern in premenopausal women because chemotherapy-induced premature menopause may result in rapid and significant bone loss.11 In contrast to premenopausal women who experience bone loss secondary to premature ovarian failure , postmenopausal women may experience direct negative effects of chemotherapy on bone metabolism .
A retrospective chart review demonstrated that postmenopausal women who underwent chemotherapy for early breast cancer experienced a significant decrease in BMD compared with women who had not received chemotherapy.12 Moreover , the authors of the study suggest that the observed BMD decrease ( 0.5 standard deviations ) in patients who received chemotherapy may result in an approximate 40% increased risk of fracture.12 .
In addition to chemotherapy , women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer may also receive aromatase inhibitors ( AIs ) as part of their adjuvant regimen .
Although AI therapy has demonstrated significant improvement in disease-free survival compared with tamoxifen , it is also associated with increased bone loss and fracture incidence .
Because low-level estrogen is bone protective in postmenopausal women , depletion of residual estrogen during AI therapy results in significant bone loss .
In the Anastrozole , Tamoxifen , Alone or in Combination ( ATAC ) trial , women receiving anastrozole had elevated levels of biochemical markers of bone turnover and experienced significant BMD loss at both the lumbar spine ( 4.1% ) and total hip ( 3.9% ) after 2 years of therapy ( P0.0001 ) .13 Bone loss continued throughout the duration of therapy and , after 5 years of anastrozole treatment , patients had experienced an approximate 8% BMD decline compared with patients who received tamoxifen ( 8.1% at lumbar spine ; 7.4% at total hip ; P0.0001 for both ) .14 Fracture incidence was also significantly higher in patients receiving anastrozole compared with tamoxifen ( 11% vs. 7.7% , respectively ; P0.0001 ; Fig. 1 ) . 
Full-size image ( 19K )
Fig. 1. Aromatase inhibitor therapy increases fractures in women with breast cancer .
Shown are fracture incidences in patients receiving aromatase inhibitor therapy , tamoxifen , and placebo in four clinical trials : ( a ) ATAC=Arimidex , Tamoxifen , Alone or in Combination15 ; ( b ) IES=Intergroup Exemestane Study16 ; ( c ) BIG 1-98=Breast International Group 1-9817 ; and ( d ) MA.17=National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group MA.17.18 Adapted with permission from Hadji.19 .
View Within Article .
Increased bone loss and fracture incidence appear to be common side effects of all AI therapy .  After 2 years of therapy , women enrolled in the Breast International Group ( BIG 1 - 98 ; n=8010 ) study who received letrozole experienced significantly more fractures than women who received tamoxifen ( 5.7% vs. 4.0% ; P0.001 ) .17 Women in the letrozole monotherapy arm ( n=2463 ) continued to have significantly more fractures than women in the tamoxifen monotherapy arm ( n=2459 ) after 5 years of treatment ( 8.6% vs. 5.8% ; P0.001 ) .20 Similarly , the 58 month results from the Intergroup Exemestane Study ( IES ) showed that fractures were significantly more frequent in women who switched to exemestane compared with women who continued on tamoxifen ( 7% vs. 5% ; P=0.003 ) .16 Overall , results from the AI trials indicate that patients will experience significant bone loss and are at increased risk of fracture .
Thus , treatment strategies that allow patients to gain the clinical benefits of AI therapy without increasing fracture risk are needed .
Managing fracture risk in patients with breast cancer .
It is clear that many breast cancer therapies that improve patient survival and reduce disease recurrence may also have a detrimental effect on bone health .
Unfortunately , guidelines for the management of bone health in women with breast cancer have fallen behind currently available clinical trial data .
As outlined in the American Society of Clinical Oncology ( ASCO ) guidelines , annual BMD screening is recommended in patients who are at high risk of experiencing fractures .
However , only patients who fall below the threshold for osteoporosis ( T-score2.5 ) are directed to receive pharmacologic therapy ( i.e. , alendronate , risedronate , zoledronic acid , or raloxifene ) .21 In this setting , an osteoporotic threshold may be too low to identify women who are at an increased risk of fracture .
For example , in a large observational study ( n=149,524 ) in healthy postmenopausal women , the majority of women ( 82% ) who sustained osteoporotic fractures within 1 year of BMD testing had T-scores greater than 2.5.22 Furthermore , 52% of fractures occurred in women with osteopenic T-scores ( 1.0 to 2.5 ) , and these women would not have been considered for therapeutic intervention using the T-score threshold specified in the ASCO guidelines.  Available data from the Livial Intervention following Breast cancer Efficacy , Recurrence , And Tolerability Endpoints ( LIBERATE ) trial suggest that women with breast cancer may have significant bone loss before beginning AI therapy.23 Measurements of baseline lumbar spine BMD indicate that 11% of patients were osteoporotic ( T-score 2.5 ) and 39% were osteopenic ( T-score 1.0 to 2.5 ) before initiating treatment in the study.23 This suggests that at least 50% of women beginning AI therapy may already have considerable bone loss .
A number of therapeutic options are available for the pharmacologic prevention of postmenopausal bone loss ; however , several of these treatments may be problematic in the context of patients with breast cancer .
In particular , hormone-replacement therapy may promote tumorigenesis or reduce the effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy in hormone-sensitive cancers .
Furthermore , oral bisphosphonates administered at doses indicated for the treatment of osteoporosis may be insufficient to protect bone in the face of bone loss accelerated by cancer treatment .
In this setting , evidence from several clinical trials indicates that the most viable treatment option to prevent AI-associated bone loss ( AIBL ) and the associated fractures may be intravenous nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates .
To that end , the intravenous bisphosphonate zoledronic acid has been examined in three clinical trials for prevention of AIBL in both pre- and postmenopausal women undergoing AI therapy .
Ovarian ablation combined with endocrine therapy in premenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer results in the near-complete suppression of estrogen production and may increase the risk of bone loss and fracture .
The Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group ( ABCSG-12 ) trial compared goserelin ovarian suppression plus tamoxifen or anastrozole in premenopausal women with hormone-responsive breast cancer .
In a BMD substudy of this trial , patients received endocrine treatment with or without zoledronic acid 4 mg every 6 months , and BMD was measured at baseline and at 6 , 12 , 24 , and 36 months .
Women who received endocrine therapy without concurrent zoledronic acid experienced significant overall bone loss throughout the 3 years of treatment .
After 36 months , patients receiving anastrozole had a significant 17.4% BMD loss at the lumbar spine and an 11.3% BMD loss at the hip ( P0.0001 and 0.0006 , respectively ) compared with baseline .24 In a similar manner , patients who received tamoxifen experienced BMD loss of 11.6% at the spine and 8.2% at the hip ( P0.0001 and =0.0005 , respectively ) .24 However , BMD was unaffected by endocrine therapies in women who received concurrent zoledronic acid and remained stable throughout the 36 months of treatment .24 Furthermore , zoledronic acid significantly decreased the proportion of patients who became osteopenic during endocrine therapy ( P0.0001 ) and prevented patients receiving anastrozole from becoming osteoporotic.24 These results demonstrate that premenopausal women receiving endocrine therapy for breast cancer are subject to significant bone loss at both the spine and hip .
Zoledronic acid administered every 6 months during endocrine treatment can prevent cancer treatment-induced bone loss in this patient population .
Full-size image ( 9K )
Fig. 2. Upfront zoledronic acid prevents bone loss in premenopausal women with breast cancer receiving endocrine therapy .
Changes from baseline T-scores over time in the lumbar spine of patients treated for 36 months with anastrozole or tamoxifenzoledronic acid are shown .
All patients received goserelin .
Reprinted from Gnant et al.24 Zoledronic acid prevents cancer treatment-induced bone loss in premenopausal women receiving adjuvant endocrine therapy for hormone-responsive breast cancer : a report from the Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group ( J Clin Oncol 2007;25:820 - 8 ) .
Reprinted with permission of the American Society of Clinical Oncology .
View Within Article .
Postmenopausal women already have significantly reduced estrogen production , and AI therapy can deplete residual estrogen levels , thus increasing bone loss and fracture risk .
The companion Zometa / Femara Adjuvant Synergy Trials ( Z-FAST and ZO-FAST ) will evaluate 4 mg zoledronic acid administered every 6 months for prevention of AIBL in patients with breast cancer receiving letrozole.25 Patients were randomized to receive zoledronic acid concomitantly with AI therapy ( upfront ) or at the first sign of significant bone loss ( T-score 2 or fracture ; i.e. , delayed ) .
After 12 months on the Z-FAST study , patients who received upfront zoledronic acid experienced BMD increases of 1.9% at the lumbar spine and 1.3% at the hip , while women in the delayed group experienced significant BMD losses ( 2.4% and 1.98% , respectively ; P0.0001 for both ; Fig. 3 ) .26 The observed BMD changes within each group appeared to correlate with changes in biochemical markers of bone metabolism .
Serum levels of N-telopeptide of type I collagen ( NTX ) and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase ( BALP ) were significantly increased in the delayed group and significantly decreased in the upfront group.26 Recently , combined 12 month data from Z-FAST and ZO-FAST were presented , and this integrated analysis confirmed that upfront zoledronic acid prevents bone loss during AI therapy.27 Furthermore , results in patients who completed 2 years of therapy indicate that upfront zoledronic acid continues to suppress markers of bone metabolism , and patients gained 5.9% and 4.7% BMD at the lumbar spine and total hip over the delayed group.28 Additional follow-up of these trials will define the long-term benefits of zoledronic acid combined with AI in early stage breast cancer .
Full-size image ( 15K )
Fig. 3. Upfront zoledronic acid prevents aromatase inhibitor-associated bone loss in postmenopausal women with breast cancer .
Mean ( standard error of the mean ) percentage changes in bone mineral density of the lumbar spine and the total hip are shown at months 6 and 12 in women with early-stage breast cancer administered upfront or delayed zoledronic acid ; P values correspond to intragroup comparisons from baseline to month 12. Reprinted from Brufsky et al.26 Zoledronic acid inhibits adjuvant letrozole-induced bone loss in postmenopausal women with early breast cancer ( J Clin Oncol 2007;25:829 - 36 ) .
Reprinted with permission of the American Society of Clinical Oncology .
View Within Article .
Conclusions .
Data from multiple clinical trials indicate that patients with breast cancer are at increased risk of fracture compared with healthy postmenopausal women .
Current guidelines for bone health management in patients with breast cancer rely on osteoporotic BMD as a treatment indicator and fail to identify a large proportion of women at risk of fracture .
In addition to the risk factors experienced by healthy postmenopausal women , such as low BMD , age , personal history of fragility fracture , family history of hip fracture , use of glucocorticoids , and low body mass index , patients with breast cancer are exposed to numerous unique fracture risk factors .
Clearly , breast cancer alone appears to increase the risk of fracture independent of other risks , and treatments including chemotherapy , gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues , and AI therapy can have a profound negative effect on bone health and thereby increase fracture risk .
As such , future bone health management guidelines will need to include a comprehensive fracture risk assessment to guide treatment decisions .
Modern treatments for breast cancer have significantly prolonged patient survival , and AI therapy has further extended disease-free survival beyond what had been achieved with tamoxifen .
One consequence of improved survival is the increasing need to address bone health issues in these patients .
Fortunately , clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of zoledronic acid for the prevention of AIBL when administered concurrently with endocrine therapy .
Therefore , zoledronic acid in combination with AI may optimize clinical outcomes by allowing patients to receive the most effective treatment without increasing fracture risk .
Conflict of interest statement .
Dr. Hadji received honoraria , unrestricted educational grants , and research funding from the following companies : Amgen , AstraZeneca , Eli Lilly , GlaxoSmithKline , MSD , Novartis , Nova Nordisk , Opfermann , Organon , Pfizer , Procter Gamble , Roche , Sanofi Aventis , Solvay , and Wyeth .
Role of funding source .
This article was supported by an unrestricted educational grant provided by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation .
Acknowledgments .
Financial support for medical editorial assistance was provided by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation .
We thank Michael Hobert , Ph.D. , ProEd Communications , Inc. , for his medical editorial assistance with this manuscript .
