Recent studies on loco-regional treatments of breast cancer demonstrate that local control may affect survival and that wide free margins should be warranted when part of the breast is preserved. 
Large glandular resections can affect final results , compromising the basic purpose of conservative surgery .
Techniques commonly employed for aesthetic surgery were introduced into oncological treatments by the mid-1990s .
When bilaterally performed ( mirror quadrantectomies ) they produce good final results and might improve oncological safety. 
We started using oncoplastic surgery in 1994 and the technique is currently offered to about 20% of our patients .
Long-term oncological results are described in this study .
Patients and methods .
This is a retrospective study on 61 women affected by breast cancer suitable for breast conservation .
Size and position of the tumours , if treated by conventional techniques , would have compromised final results .
Sixty-three cancers ( two bilateral ) had been removed from November 1994 to December 2001 .
In all cases we performed a bilateral breast reduction using inferior , superior , or combined pedicle techniques. 
All patients involved in the study were submitted to a specific consent process and counselled regarding advantages and limitations of oncoplastic operations .
Surgical methodology .
During pre-operative planning we evaluated breast shape , size , degree of ptosis , and the position of the lesion .
Tumours located in the inferior pole of the breast were treated by a superior pedicle technique ; cancers in the upper pole or in the infero-lateral or infero-medial quadrants of the breast were excised with an inferior pedicle reduction .
Small and medium size breast irrespectively of tumour location required a periareolar , or comma-shaped approach .
Table 1. .
Population .
No. of patients61 No. of cases63 Mean age45.3 .
Tumour size T1a2 T1b6 T1c28 T226 T3 - T41 .
Receptor status ER / PgR+48 ER/PgR+14 ER / PgR1 .
Histotype Infiltrating ductal carcinoma58 Infiltrating lobular carcinoma5 .
Grading G114 G235 G318 .
Nodal status N043 N118 N22 .
Full-size table .
View Within Article .
Operations were performed by a single oncoplastic surgeon without assistance of a specialist plastic surgeon .
Resections were accurately planned and final shape was assessed intra-operatively and post-operatively with photographic examination Figure 1 , Figure 2 , Figure 3 and Figure 4. .
Full-size image ( 30K )
Figure 1. Mirror quadrantectomy and inferior pedicle breast reduction : pre-op .
View Within Article .
Full-size image ( 25K )
Figure 2. Mirror quadrantectomy and inferior pedicle breast reduction : results .
View Within Article .
Full-size image ( 26K )
Figure 3. Mirror quadrantectomy and superior pedicle breast reduction : pre-op .
View Within Article .
Full-size image ( 23K )
Figure 4. Mirror quadrantectomy and superior pedicle breast reduction : results .
View Within Article .
Once the specimen was removed and oriented , intra-operative gross-examination was performed by the pathologist to assure at least 1 cm of macroscopic complete excision.13 .
Cavity margins were eventually re-excised and a second specimen with new orientation was sent for permanent sections .
Margins were considered free when there was no microscopic evidence of either in situ or invasive cancer within 2 mm from resection edges.14 If these were infiltrated and intra-operatively excised new margins were free , we did not indicate re-intervention .
Metallic clips were left to improve identification of the tumour bed .
Following surgical treatment and chemotherapy if required , all patients underwent radiation ; 50 Gy were delivered to the whole breast plus a boost of 10 Gy to the tumour bed .
Intra-operative radiotherapy was not employed in this series .
Oncological follow-up was performed with annual clinical examination , bilateral mammography , and blood tests .
When a clinical suspicion occurred bone scan , liver US scan , chest X-rays and CT scan , were employed to detect distant disease .
Results Population .
Sixty-one women ( two bilateral cancers ) underwent 63 mirror quadrantectomies .
They were followed up for 68 months ( range , 36 - 120 ) .
Median age was 45.3 years ; 32 women were post-menopausal .
Six patients had a positive family history of breast cancer ( with at least one first degree relative affected ) .
Cases were subdivided according to pTNM classification : 8 were pT1a - b , 28 pT1c , and 26 pT2 .
We had a single case of pT4 detected at final pathological examination .
The majority of patients were free of disease in the axilla ( 43 ) , 18 were pN1 , and 2 pN2 .
Table 2. .
Surgical technique .
Inferior pedicle27 Superior pedicle9 Comma shaped3 Two-pedicles3 Augmentation2 .
Full-size table .
View Within Article .
Estrogen and progesterone receptor status were investigated ; 48 cases were double positive ( ER+ , PgR+ ) 14 double negative ( ER , PgR ) .
In only one case estrogen receptors were the only expressed receptors .
Hystopathological grading G1 is reported in 10 women of the sample , 35 were G2 , 18 G3 .
Oncological and surgical outcome .
We obtained complete excision ( 2 mm free margins ) in 92% of patients and 10 mm margins in 77.7% of the sample .
In three cases margins were 2 mm , with negative intra-operative re-excision .
Two patients had DCIS foci at the margins but also in this case intra-operative new margins were negative .
No patients had a second general anaesthesia for re-excision of margins .
No contra-lateral occult cancers were identified in the healthy breast specimen .
We had a single case ( 1.5% ) of local recurrence 37 months after surgical treatment .
This woman received further treatment with a second excision and is currently alive free of disease .
Five out of 61 patients deceased of metastatic breast cancer ( 9.83% ) , while one is currently alive with bone metastasis .
We investigated the characteristics of patients with distant recurrence and we found a median age of 38 , median survival from diagnosis of 36 months , two patients had bilateral synchronous disease .
Four patients out of five were pT2 , three estrogen receptors negative , and two pN positive .
For what concerns complications we reported five cases of skin suffering and one case of partial nipple necrosis .
They were treated with local dressing and nipple removal was never required .
Discussion Local control affects survival .
The original Fisherian predicament of breast cancer as a metastatic disease from its inception has been revised during the years .
The NSABP-B06 trial in its 20 years follow-up demonstrated a small but significant decrease in deaths due to breast cancer in patients treated by lumpectomy and radiation compared to those who underwent lumpectomy alone .
This subset also reported a higher local recurrence rate .
This advantage was partially offset by mortality from other causes.2 Similar reports were confirmed by Veronesi et al. who compared quadrantectomy radiation and found a slightly higher , although not significant mortality rate in node-positive patients who did not receive radiotherapy.15 .
Further evidence was provided by the recent meta-analysis from the Early Breast Cancer Trialists Cooperative Group who reported that a quarter of isolated recurrences will cause death from breast cancer that would not have happened otherwise after 15 years of follow-up.1 .
Local control could be a determinant of survival in a percentage of affected women and large free margins of resection are recommended by the founders of breast conservative treatment. 
Oncoplastic surgery allows wider excisions and improves local control .
The oncoplastic concept is based on the possibility of performing large resections according to breast reduction techniques .
Giacalone et al.7 compared resection margins of quadrantectomies to those of oncoplastic surgery and confirmed that a 10 mm free margin was obtained more frequently with this technique .
These conclusions are in keeping with those reported by Kaur et al.5 who also found that oncoplastic resections are associated with larger volumes of breast tissue excised and an increased rate of free margins .
Some other studies report on a low close margins rate which is often lower than the 10% reported in NSABP-B06 trial. 
In our series a further completion surgery was never required and we never observed focal involvement of margins .
This is possibly due to intra-operative pathologic gross-examination followed by simultaneous resections to reach at least 1 cm of free tissue.13 In our opinion secondary surgery should be avoided not only to prevent psychological complications but also because further excisions after oncoplastic techniques can become challenging .
Long-term follow-up .
Few studies report on long-term oncological results of oncoplastic surgery .
Recently Rietjens et al. in a series of 148 cases with a median follow-up of 74 months reported a 3% rate of local recurrences after 5 years.6 A comparison was made with historical studies on breast conservation such as the Milan I trial that reported a 0.5% recurrence rate for tumours less than 1 cm.18 Specifically in this series the authors didn't observe any local recurrence for lesions below 2 cm .
Rietjens also observed that local recurrences in pT2 / pT3 after oncoplastic surgery reach a plateaux after mastectomies in the Milan I trial .
This rate in the same study is constantly increasing for conventional quadrantectomies even after 20 years .
These results although very interesting are not in accordance with those reported by Clough .
He described a 9.4% 5 years local recurrence rate with a 10.9% of involved margins.19 .
We had only one case of local recurrence in a lady who received an inferior pedicle breast reduction for a T2 lobular carcinoma of the breast .
This histopathology has a higher likelihood of multi-focal behaviour and might have determined reappearance of disease .
This lady was treated by further excision and she is currently alive free of disease .
Contra-lateral sampling and occult breast cancer .
Mirror quadrantectomy allows a sampling of the contra-lateral breast to detect any occult disease as suggested by Petit in 1997.20 He reported a 4.6% of breast cancer in the specimen of contra-lateral breast reductions .
This rate was confirmed in a recent series of 2007.6 .
In our study no contra-lateral occult breast cancers were found probably because of the shortness of the sample .
However , opposite breast exploration is still in our opinion an interesting opportunity to unveil occult contra-lateral disease .
Breast oncoplastic surgery limitations .
Although oncoplastic surgery provides rewarding symmetrical cosmetic outcomes and it is likely to be proven as an effective oncological procedure , it is currently far to become the gold standard of conservative treatment .
Several reasons may explain these difficulties .
First of all cosmetic procedures require a plastic surgery expertise that is not in the hands of most of the surgeons dealing with breast cancer now-a-days .
Plastic surgeons , on the other hand , are culturally unaware of basic oncological skills .
Oncoplastic surgery is not only challenging , it is also expensive and often doubles the time of conventional quadrantectomies .
If generalized it is likely to dramatically increase waiting lists and to affect National Health Service budget.21 Indications should be restricted only to lesions whose size and location could compromise acceptable cosmetic results .
Bilateral reductions for small cancers in large breast should be considered over-treatment unless an increased oncological effectiveness will be definitively demonstrated .
Finally , complex glandular reshaping could become a challenge for low-experienced breast radiotherapists and for breast radiologist dealing with follow-up mammograms .
Thanks to our multidisciplinary oncological approach , we never experienced difficulties in these fields .
Conclusion .
Breast oncoplastic surgery in our experience is a good tool to warrant local control of breast localized neo-plastic disease .
It requires a dedicated expertise and in our opinion should be practiced only in multidisciplinary integrated cancer center .
The mirror quadrantectomy model although extremely effective , is not likely to become the standard of care and more efficient techniques should be tested .
Conflict of interest .
All authors declare no financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence ( bias ) their work .
Acknowledgements .
The authors acknowledge Miss Paola Tarro for her cooperation in effective scientific writing .
